---
title: Declarative Components
---

# Declare Your Web Components

Declaring components are not exactly a _new_ thing. It's just a way for us to agree on a _convention_ to declare what we want from a custom element, using 3 API's that modern platforms already offer: {@link HTMLTemplateElement template}, [JavaScript modules](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Guide/Modules), {@link ShadowDOM} and {@link CSSStyleSheet}.

Different libraries or frameworks have tried to solve the same problem. In multiple ways. We want to find a the "special ways" of doing things, and go back to simple and easy concepts.

Before we dig in: this is not a criticism of all the awesome work put behind big frameworks and libraries out there.
Everyone is doing their absolute best to solve a difficult problem!

So let's see a few examples:

## The cases of TMAitis (too-much-abstraction)

### VueJS Syntax

Vue uses single-file components concept, with an HTML-like syntax.
The "special things" that Vue adds are the `:` and `@` characters in attribute names, which are not valid in HTML.
There are also "special" attributes like `v-if` and `v-for`, which are a way to put an entire element behind a template and add logic to define their visibility.
Then we have the `#` character for template slots, which is also not valid HTML.

### Angular Syntax

Angular uses [Classes](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Classes) and [Decorators](https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/decorators.html), and also adds special `[]`, `()` and `[()]` attributes (or was it `([])`??).

### React Syntax

I don't even...

React made [JSX](https://react.dev/learn/writing-markup-with-jsx) famous and added more specific syntax as well.
Events are inline "things", with special brackets around values and all that. I could never really memorize all that.

### Alpine or HTMX?

These add again very specific syntax to their mental model, which is not easy to remember.

From their docs: `Alpine is a collection of 15 attributes, 6 properties, and 2 methods.`

## Can we agree upon a simpler model?

We can choose a _predictable_ mental model instead of the specifics of each library.
But we must also keep things flexible, so that we can make additions as needed.

Components have a few common needs:

- We need Javascript values. Properties are more than just strings
- We only communicate via _events_
- We want to _wrap_ around content, with some "slots" where we insert that content
- We need a predictable state management
- We need fine-grained updates to elements, that are fast and efficient

So let's agree on some principles:

> 1. Data flow is predictable: only `props` down and only `events` up. No two-way communication!

> 2. The only way a component can change from the _outside_ is with a change in its properties.

> 3. any change _inside_ a component is propagated up as an event.

> 4. any string in a property binding or event handler is valid Javascript and **local** to the current context, **never global**

With that in mind, we still need _something_ to add life to HTML.
Let's start with only TWO _conventions_ for our components: event names start with `on-` and properties with `prop-`.

Now we can declare what we want:

```html
<custom-element on-name="reaction()" prop-name="value"></custom-element>
```

We still need to sprinkle some Javascript into our component to make it useful.
Let's look at other Web APIs we can use to expand our component convention.

## Web APIs we can use today

We have quite a few things to put together before we can fully use the web platform. Here are some of the API's we can explore:

- Custom Elements Registry
- Templates and Slots
- ES Modules
- adopted CSS Stylesheets
- Import Maps
- Abort Controllers
- Shadow DOM and ElementInternals
- CSS parts selector

We will also build on top of concepts previously popularized by projects like Angular, VueJS, SolidJS and React.

- Ref
- data binding
- props
- API Composition
- Functional components
- Redux/Store pattern

## Narrow Down the Execution Context

Historically, a web page has a shared Javascript execution context, sometimes called "global scope", where all parts of a page must coexist. When pages were _mostly_ text, with barely any Javascript, this was okay.

But the Web evolved, and with it, more complex structures started to emerge.
It became harder and harder to maintain with a global context.

We need _something_ in a page to create local variables, declare local event handlers, load modules and manage state.
We should also _compose_ with pieces of logic anda data without assigning values to the `window` object.

Another problem area is styling: we don't want global styles applied everywhere. Sometimes styles must be scoped to a single component.

[Custom Elements](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Web_components) are one of the building blocks we need to achieve just that.
We declare a custom `<any-name>` tag and let the platform initialize it for us. Inside that context, we can import modules, load stylesheets and run our business completely isolated from the global state.

## Declaring Components In HTML

The [`<template>` element](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/template) provides an API to include HTML in a webpage without rendering it.

This is very useful for us: we can load components just like any other HTML content, then read their content and "hydrate" the HTML with the help of Javascript, of course.

From a `template` element we use `.contents.cloneNode()` API to clone the entire template content without modifying the original nodes.

Another important aspect of templates is that scripts and styles **are not active**.
We can include a `<script>` tag inside a template and use that as our component source.
That's possible because of [modules](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Guide/Modules).

### Using `<script setup>` and `<template component>` attribute

OK, now that we agreed upon attributes for components, let's add TWO other convetions:

> 1. add a `component` attribute to a `<template>` to create a custom element with a name

```html
<template component="ui-card">~</template>
```

> 2. add a `<script>` tag inside that template to declare the component behaviour


Now, a component can be authored in plain HTML, and even inserted into a webpage directly into the source.

> This is also not new. We can also use a [Declarative Shadow DOM](https://web.dev/articles/declarative-shadow-dom) to achieve that.
> In that case, we don't reuse anything, and all content is inline.

Here's what we introduce _on top of the standard API_:


- optionally, add `shadow-dom` attribute to specify [Shadow DOM](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Web_components/Using_shadow_DOM) API options.

```html
<template component="ui-card" shadow-dom="open"></template>
```

- create a `<script setup>` tag to write the component logic.
  Use [import](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Guide/Modules#importing_features_into_your_script) to load `@li3/web` and export a setup function:

```html
<script setup>
  import { defineEvent, defineProp, signal, effect } from '@li3/web';
  export default function () {
    /* ... */
  }
</script>
```

## Summary

OK, let's take one step back and recap:

- `<template component>` for declarative component
- `<script setup>` for declarative component behaviour
- `<custom-element prop-* on-*>` for props and events with local scope.

Let's see all together in a `ui-card` component:

```html
<template component="ui-card" shadow-dom="open">
  <div class="card">
    <span class="card-title">{{ title }}</span>
    <slot></slot>
  </div>

  <script setup>
    import { defineProp } from '@li3/web';
    export default function uiCard() {
      defineProp('title', '');
    }
  </script>

  <style>
    .card {
      padding: 1rem;
      margin: 1rem auto;
      border-radius: 0.5rem;
      border: 1px solid #ccc;
      background-color: white;
    }
    .card-title {
      color: #999;
      text-transform: uppercase;
      font-size: 0.75rem;
      display: inline-block;
      padding: 0 0 1rem 0;
    }
  </style>
</template>
```
