# Component Syntax

Now that we know how to declare components, let's look at the template syntax for property bindings and events.

## Text interpolation

Use two curly brackets to mark text areas to interpolate:

```html
<div>Hello, {{ name }}!</div>
```

### How to bind a property to a value?

Add `bind-` prefix to a property name and an expression in the attribute to evaluate.
For properties that need `camelCase` syntax, like `innerText`, use a dash format instead: `inner-text`.
Acronyms like `inner-html` and `base-url` also work.

```html
<tag bind-property="expression">
```

### How to bind an attribute to a value?

The same way you bind a property:

`attr-name="expression"`

### How can I add/remove a CSS class based on a condition?

Add the class name after the `class-` prefix to add/remove it based on the value of an expression

`class-font-bold="booleanValue"`

Invalid attribute name characters cannot be used for class bindings.

### How to listen to an event

Any event listener can be attached to an element with the `on-` prefix.
Event flags can be added after the event name, separated with a dot.

Two arguments are provided to an event handler: `$event` and `$flags`.
Use the `stop` flag to call `.stopPropagation()`, and `prevent` to call `.preventDefault()` in the event.
Native API flags like `capture` and `once` can be set via flags too, or any custom flag you wish to use.

Here we call `onButtonClick(mouseEvent, { prevent: true, primary: true })`:

```html
<button on-click.prevent.primary="onButtonClick($event, $flags)">OK</button>
```

### How to reference a template child node?

This happens in two parts:

- Template side:

```html
<div ref="refName"></div>
```

- Setup function side:

```js
import { ref } from "@li3/web";

function setup() {
  const refName = ref();
  return { refName };
}
```
